Nimitz has been symbol of United State’s
military might, and has been used to project
power far from its coastlines.
Ford class super-carriers are being built
to replace some of the United States Navy's
existing Nimitz-class carriers from 2017.
The first ship of this class is Gerald R.
Ford is commission on 22 July this year.
It has many key improvements over Nimitz class
like Electromagnetic Aircraft Launch System
and much more onboard power.
Russia’s 3M22 Zircon hypersonic cruise missile
is expected to enter into production in 2018.
The new weapon is capable of speeds of more
than Mach 6 is currently in final stage of
testing.
The missile is specifically designed to take
out high value targets like aircraft carriers
and destroyers.
In this video, Defense Updates checks out
if USS GERALD R FORD is capable of defending
itself against ZIRCON MISSILE.
Lets get started.
Zircon missile weights 5 tons.
It is equipped with a scramjet engine type,
which compresses air before it enters the
combustion chamber.
The scramjet is an innovation on the ramjet,
in which the combustion chamber is specially
designed to operate with supersonic airflow.
Ramjet engine powers the Indo Russian Brahmos
supersonic cruise missile that can travel
at speeds of 2.8 to 3 Mach.
Scramjet is simply an acronym for 'supersonic
combustion' ramjet.
Scramjet powered Zircon has a speed of Mach
6.2 (6,500 km/h) at a cruising altitude of
30 km.
So it is much faster than a bullet fired from
a sniper rifle, actually twice the speed of
a sniper’s bullet.
The kinetic energy alone will rip a ship apart
like a tin can.
The range is around 400km (250 miles), though
some sources say it could be up to 1000 km
(620 miles).
The Zircon has both radar target seeker and
an optical-electronic complex, to trace and
detect targets.
The missile can be equipped with a High Explosive
(HE) warhead or even a tactical nuclear warhead.
Ford class carriers like Nimitz class have
a layered anti missile defense system.
1. The RIM-162 Evolved SeaSparrow Missile (ESSM)
is a development of the RIM-7 Sea Sparrow
missile used to protect ships from attacking
missiles and aircraft.
ESSM is designed to counter supersonic maneuvering
anti-ship missiles.
It also has the ability to be "quad-packed"
in the Mark 41 Vertical Launch System, allowing
up to four ESSMs to be carried in a single
cell.
It has speed of more than 4 Mach and has a
range of 50 km.
2/ The RIM-116 Rolling Airframe Missile is a
small, lightweight, infrared homing surface-to-air
missile It is used primarily as a point-defense
weapon against ant ship cruise missiles.
The missile has a speed in excess of 2 Mach
and has an operational range of 9 km.
3. The Phalanx CIWS is a close-in weapon system
for defense against anti-ship missiles.
It is intended to provide last-ditch defense
when the primary two options have not successfully
intercepted the incoming missile.
It consists of a radar-guided 20 mm Vulcan
cannon mounted on a swiveling base.
It has firing rate of 75 rounds/second, range
of 3.5 km and muzzle velocity of 1,100 m/s
For years, military planners have grouped
carriers with other ships armed with missile
defense systems, using their own radars and
interceptor missiles to protect the massive
carriers from existing projectiles.
So at any time the Ford will have a net of
destroyers and or frigates around it.
Also, US Navy carrier groups have Airborne
Warning and Control System (AWACS) that fly
ahead to look for potential threats.
It is likely that the Zircon will be detected
as soon as it is launched.
At a distance of 400 km the Carrier Group
will have only about 3.5 minutes to react.
The problem with intercepting will come because
none of the current 3 anti missile defense
system available are meant to destroy hypersonic
missiles, these can work against supersonic
missile though the success rate even in that
case will depend on many factors.
As per most analysts, a swarm attack with
of 5 to 6 highly maneuvering supersonic Brahmos
missile is expected to saturate the defenses
and 1-2 is likely to score a hit.
In case of Zircon, the chances of penetrating
the defenses are much higher owing to the
massive speed.
Even if the missile is broken up or detonated
by close-in weapons, the debris will have
so much kinetic energy that the ship may still
be badly damaged.
There has not been any specific comment from
American military about Zircon missile but
sources in Britain have ringed the alarm bell.
In March this year, one senior British Naval
source said: “Hypersonic missiles are virtually unstoppable”.
The Royal Navy’s Sea Ceptor missile defense
installed on the latest Queen Elizabeth class
carrier like the US counterpart is designed
to shoot down missiles travelling at supersonic
speeds not hypersonic speed.
As discussed, the current defense system will
be found wanting against Zircon.
But US military has already stepped up the
game.
One of the most important upgrades in Ford
class compared to Nimitz class is the available
power.
2 Bechtel A1B nuclear reactors are installed
in Gerald R. Ford.
Each one these are capable of producing 300
MW of electricity, triple the 100 MW of each
Nimitz-class reactors.
These have been installed so that the Ford
class can be equipped with Laser guns in coming
days.
The LaWS, an acronym for Laser Weapons System
is currently in testing phase and it is expected
that in future its variants will be installed
in US navy ships.
Laser weapons begin with an advantage no other
weapon ever invented comes even close to matching.
It moves, by definition, at the speed of light.
For comparison, that is more than 50,000 times
the speed of an incoming missile like Zircon.
LASER weapons will be the apt answer for defending
against Zircon missile.
In current state, the Zircon missile is a
mighty adversary to US Navy carrier groups
and will potentially make the US carriers
stay out of its range.
In future, laser weapons will be able to level
the playing field.
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
(SIPRI) has recently published its report
on military spending of 2016.
US still dominate the space and on a grand
scale, the report showed.
Total US military expenditure of $611 billion
is over one-third of world military expenditure.
This is nearly 3 times the level of China’s
spending, which is ranked second, and 9 times
the spending of Russia which is ranked 4th.
It is clear that Russia cannot match the US,
platform to platform in military hardware,
for example it cannot build so many aircraft
carriers to equal the US carrier fleet.
Hence, it is focusing on developing asymmetric
warfare capabilities and Zircon is designed
keeping that in mind.
As of today, Zircon missile costing few million
dollars is technically capable of taking out
a newly build 13 billion dollar carrier.